# Prefix Sum/Range Sum Query:
##### Revision-2=================

###### 1
- The range sum query technique is a method for answering queries that ask for the sum of a range of elements in an array.
- The basic idea behind the range sum query technique is to precompute the sum of all the elements in the array.
- This can be done by creating a prefix sum array, which is an array where the `i`<sup>th</sup> element is equal to the sum of all the elements in the array from index `0` to index `i`.
- `prefixSum[i] = arr[0]+ arr[1]+ .....+ arr[i-1] + arr[i]`

### How to create a Prefix Sum Array?

```java
     int[] input = {1,5,3,4,6,7,10};
     int[] prefixSum = new int[input.length];
     for(int i=0; i< input.length; i++){
            if(i==0)
                prefixSum[i] = input[i];
            else
                prefixSum[i] = prefixSum[i-1] + input[i];
        }
```
- Remember this: `prefixSum[i] = arr[0]+ arr[1]+ .....+ arr[i-1] + arr[i]`
- As part of cumulative sum, if you want ot find the sum of `i`<sup>th</sup> element you can directly add `i`<sup>th</sup> value to previous sum(which is `i-1`<sup>th</sup> sum) i.e  `prefixSum[i] = prefixSum[i-1] + input[i]`

### How to answer the range_sum queries by using prefix sum array?

- Once the prefix sum array has been created, answering a range sum query is very simple.
- To answer a query that asks for the sum of the elements in the range from index `L` to index `R`, 
- **Range sum[L, R]:**
  
        - If L==0 then range sum = prefixSum[R]
        - Otherwise,
        - we simply subtract the sum of the elements in the range from index 0 to index L-1 from the sum of the elements in the range from index 0 to index R.
        - RangeSum[L,R] = prefixSum[R]-prefixSum[L-1]
##### Note:
- in prefixSum array every element is the cumulative sum of input array from  0 to i
- prefixSum[i] is always gives the sum from 0 to i
- If you want sum only from particular range then you have to subtract left-side index sum
- Example: 
```text
    Range sum of [3,6]
    pfSum[6] = arr[0]+arr[1]+arr[2]+arr[3]+arr[4]+arr[5]+arr[6]
    To get range from 3 to 6 then you have to remove arr[0]+arr[1]+arr[2] from pfSum[6]
    which is nothing but pfSum[2] = arr[0]+arr[1]+arr[2]
    As per the query we want to include arr[3] into the sum
    Finally, range sum [3,6] = pfSum[6]-pfSum[3-1]
    if you don't want to include index 3 then you can simply use range sum (3,6] = pfSum[6]-pfSum[3]

```
  
### When to Use?

        - Respond to range-sum-queries and range-xor-queries
        - Find sum of all elements in a given range
        - Locate subarrays having the highest sum
        - Locate the subarray whose total is closest to a given value
        - Locate subarrays of two arrays that are the same length and sum
        - Simulate parallel algorithms

###### 3
#### Example:
- For better understanding let us take cricket score board example
- we have 10 overs score: {5,6,18,14,12,0,1,8,20,0}
- Question: what are the scores in the invervals of [0,5], [3,6], [2,7], [0,8],[0,5], [0,10] ?

- **Brute-Force:**
    - for each interval iterate over the array from startIndex to endIndex and calculate the sum
    - Time Complexity: for every query `N` iterations N=size of the array, so for `K` queries we need to iterate `K*N` times, for `K>=N` it will be O(N^2)
- Is there way to optimize this?
yes, by using Range Sum we can solve this problem in `T.C = O(N)`

**Prefix Sum Technique:**

- Given input: {5,6,18,14,12,0,1,8,20,0}
- first we calculate prefix sum array:
- pfSum[] = {5,5+6,5+6+18,5+6+18+14,5+6+18+14+12, 5+6+18+14+12+0, 5+6+18+14+12+0+1,  5+6+18+14+12+0+1+8, 5+6+18+14+12+0+1+8+20, 5+6+18+14+12+0+1+8+20+0 }
- pfSum[] = {5,11,29,43,55,55,56,65,85,85}
- Queries: [0,5], [3,6], [2,7], [0,8],[0,5], [0,10]
- Formula: if L=0 then pfSum[R], otherwise pfSum[R]-pfSum[L-1]
- [0,5] => pfSum[5]
- [3,6] => pfSum[6] - pfSum[3-1], ... so on

**Pseudo Code:**
```java
  arr[] = {5,6,18,14,12,0,1,8,20,0};
  pfSum = calculatePrefixSum();
  qs[][] = [[0,5], [3,6], [2,7], [0,8],[0,5], [0,10]]
  for(int i=0;i<qs.length;i++){
    int L = qa[i][0];
    int R = qa[i][R];
    if(L==0)
        int rangeSum = pfSum[R];
    else
        int rangeSum = pfSum[R]-pfSum[L-1];
  }

```

##### Summary
- PrefixSum formula for **i<sup>th</sup>** element:
         
        - If i=0 then pfSum[0] = ar[0]
        - Otherwise, pfSum[i] = pfSum[i-1]+ar[i]
- RangeSum formula for index range [L,R]:
           
        - If L=0 then rangeSum[L,R] = pfSum[R]
        - Otherwise, rangeSum[L,R] = pfSum[R]-pfSum[L-1]

###### 5 
### Problems
1. Q4.Given an array, arr[] of size N, the task is to find the count of array indices such that removing an element from these indices makes the sum of even-indexed and odd-indexed array elements equal.
2. Q3. You are given an integer array A of length N.
   You are also given a 2D integer array B with dimensions M x 2, where each row denotes a [L, R] query.
   For each query, you have to find the sum of all elements from L to R indices in A (0 - indexed).
   More formally, find A[L] + A[L + 1] + A[L + 2] +... + A[R - 1] + A[R] for each query.
3. AQ2. Problem Description
   You are given an array A of integers of size N.

Your task is to find the equilibrium index of the given array

The equilibrium index of an array is an index such that the sum of elements at lower indexes is equal to the sum of elements at higher indexes.

If there are no elements that are at lower indexes or at higher indexes, then the corresponding sum of elements is considered as 0.

Note:

Array indexing starts from 0.
If there is no equilibrium index then return -1.
If there are more than one equilibrium indexes then return the minimum index.

4. AQ3. Given an array A of N integers. Construct prefix sum of the array in the given array itself.
5. 

#### References:
1. https://www.jordan-cp.com/blog/prefix_sum
2. https://www.scaler.com/topics/prefix-sum/
3. 


